well for more on this Jeremy kendic is
president at refugees International he's
also a former official in two previous
US administrations working on overseas 8
he joins us from Washington DC thank you
very much for being with us here on El
jazer first of all what do you make of
this of Israel temporarily opening the
IR border crossing and allowing up to
350 extra trucks to go through do you
think it's going to be anywhere near
enough at this point in time for what is
needed especially in the North of
Gaza well it's it's a step in a positive
direction but it's certainly still far
short of what needs to happen I think
it's really striking that after months
of denying that they were obstructing
Aid um that when President Biden really
laid down the line with prime minister
Netanyahu suddenly they found a bunch of
new ways to unblock Aid um but it's not
enough and as the last presenter said
without a ceasefire a it will not be
possible possible for Aid groups to put
together the kind of anti-am operation
that Gaza now requires you can't do that
solely off the backs of trucks you need
the space to operate safely to run
malnutrition treatment centers to
restore the health system to rebuild
Water Systems uh and of course to
distribute food at at Large Scale none
of that is possible as long as the war
is continuing as we mentioned when we
were introducing you that you've worked
in two previous US administrations
specific specifically working on
overseas aid can you just give us a
little bit of an insight into what you
think might have happened behind the
scenes uh that pushed Biden finally to
put more pressure on Netanyahu to allow
more Aid into
Gaza well I for for months of course
even from the earliest days of this War
President Biden has been calling on the
Israeli government to adhere to
International humanitarian law to
protect civilians to protect Aid workers
and there has been negligibly little
progress on that for six months and I
think a few recent events have brought
this to a head and and to a point where
even President Biden who has been very
very reluctant to put pressure on the
Israeli government uh could not could
not choose any other course but to take
a harder line and obviously the world
Central Kitchen strike is a huge part of
that it shows how broken uh the Israeli
system for what's called deconfliction
the the the process for protecting
humanitarians from military strikes
shows how broken that process has been
shows how uh flawed The Rules of
Engagement are by the Israeli military
if they could so easily strike such an
obvious humanitarian Convoy but in
addition to all that of course there is
a famine getting underway in Gaza and as
I as I mentioned earlier there's no way
to really adequately fight that as long
as this work continues yeah and and
that's why so many people have been
calling for a ceasefire just on
president Biden I mean he would be fully
briefed uh about the situation on the
ground like the realities of what is
happening day and day out within Gaza so
what do you think why do you think it
took him until now until this strike on
the world uh Central Kitchen Aid workers
for him to have finally put pressure on
Netanyahu well I I think this was
something that just could not be
dismissed or ignored um you know as you
as you said earlier in the report and as
his own statement said after the world
Central Kitchen strike this is not the
first time this has happened there have
been strikes on humanitarian operations
throughout this war there have been more
than 170 staff of the uh of uh the UN um
principally ana who have been killed
over the course of this war but also
deaths of staff from save the children
uh from anera from uh Doctors Without
Borders uh there was an International
Rescue committee guest house that was
hit staff that was hit so you know this
has been a routine thing this is this is
an extreme example of a pattern that has
been going on throughout and that's why
Aid groups have been pushing the
president for months now to take a
harder line with the Israeli government
on that I think that the world Central
Kitchen strike and it just made that it
it was such a gratuitous example that he
could no longer uh he could no longer
maintain the support that he's been
holding for the Netanyahu government
okay thanks so much we really do
appreciate you time and your Insight
Germany kandek thank you very
much thank you